in this video we're going to install the
sql lite three command line shell for
Windows computers now if you're using a
Mac or Linux machine
skip to the next video or the video
after that for your operating system but
if you're in Windows you're in the right
place so let's make a start now python
includes sqlite in its standard
library so we don't need to install
anything to use sqlite in our Python
programs now thing to keep in mind here
that writing data base code
straightaway isn't the easiest way to
learn about sqlite and the sql
language so if you get errors you have to
work out if it's the error or the errors
in your python code or in the sql
statement that you've used so what we're
going to do to start is we're going to
start by installing the sqlite command line
shell so that we can create databases
and use sql commands without having
to worry about Python code yet on
Windows the sqlite command-line
shell is an executable file called sql
light three dot exe unfortunately this
isn't included with python so this video
we're going to see how to download that
executable and add it to our computers
path so that we can use it
first things first we're going to go to
the sqlite website....and
you can see at the top we get there there's
a download link so i'm going to click on
that now there is actually an installer
for sqlite instead it's packaged
into a number of zip files now I mention
that sqlite is included in the standard
Python libraries so consequently we
don't need to install sqlite
itself the file we want actually is a
bundle up command line tools for managing
sql li like databases you can see we've
got one here we've got a osx version
there and down here we've got a windows
version here a bundle of command line
tools for managing sqlite databases
i'm going to click on that link now
bearing in mind when you're
watching this video the version number
may have changed but that's alright if
it's a later version and click on that
one and leave that downloading it's
actually finished it was quite a quick
download I do notice that the description
for this file includes links to the
three executables over here we've got
the command line shell
sql diff .exe and sqlite analyzer
dot exe I suggest you bookmark
this page so that you can come back here
and check those links and in the future
but the tool we need at the moment is the
Command line shell so what we need to do is
extract the contents of the zip file to
a suitable directory and then add that
directory to our path i'm going to do is
just go to the folder where that is
sqlite was opened and you can
see that I've actually got sqlite tools
there so I'm just going to extract
all extracted currently in that current
path for now it's quite quick because
its only a small file what I'm going to
do now we're going to move these
I'm going to right-click that the
folder that was extracted ok so I'm
going to cut that folder and then what
i'm going to do i'm actually going to
put this in my users like sort of main
home folder that you can put this in the
program files directory or somewhere
else doesn't really matter but for
simplicity what i'm going to do is just
go to my local disk into my users and
Tim which is the folder that I'm
gonna put it I'm going to actually save
it in there but again the choice is
yours to where you want to save it so
i'm going to right click and do paste to
put in it and that's now the folder
I moved over and we double-click
it now to open the folder what we can do
up here is we can actually come up here
and click the address bar and
then click on control c that's
actually gonna take a copy of the path
which we can use to actually update the
path on the computer now the
instructions to set the path start off
slightly differently depending on which
version of windows that you're
using i'm using Windows 10 here and if
your keyboards got a
Windows key the quickest way for all
versions of windows is to use windows
and pause i hold down the windows key
press pause which I'm going to do or
click pause that brings up this window
here otherwise we just need to navigate
to the control panel system and security
and system on your version of windows
to get access to it and then from here
we can actually click on the advanced
system settings on the left i'm going
to click on that that takes you to the
system properties dialog which is where
all other windows version should
already be so basically a couple of ways
to get there but the bottom line is you
want to get to this location and from
here what we want to do is click on
environment
variables and just a quick note that if
for some reason you couldn't get there
with the windows key you can actually
just a right click the my computer icon
on your desktop and choose properties
and you there as well
alright so we're actually here now and
what we want to do is come down here to
where it's got the edit button are
making sure that path is selected over
here under user variables unless you
really comfortable with doing this leave
the system variable section down here at
the bottom completely alone if you mess
up the system path variables it can be
really quite difficult to recover
windows so you can get into difficulty
so just you don't touch that area but
under the user variable their may or may not
already be a path variable as you can
see here in my case it already exists
and I actually got my python
installation actually in the path but if
you're not there
you don't see a path variable you click
on new and you actually specify the
pathnames as path the word path and then
you type in the value or paste in the
value right here so put those details in
but in my case because the path already
exists i'm going to click on edit so
select path click on edit and what we're
going to do now is actually add the path
now this is actually showing a new path
variable being created on Windows 10 if
your editing an existing path variable
leave the name unchange just add a
semicolon to the end of the previous
value as a couple of ways of doing it
but this is the new way on Windows 10
where you click on new
just actually paste in the value their
for some reason the control
c didn't work so just
get back to the Explorer again i can
actually just going to their we can make
sure that that's actually showing like
that I think that is what I did last time will
control c their or right-click
and do a copy for want to that way to
copy that entire path and if I go back now
to the system environment variables area
click on new I can paste that in and
that's now that variable that's been
added so either way whether you've got
the option to do it this way we've got
an older way may just be shown the entire
path got the old way
go to the end the end of the paths
settings that the various paths the
defined on your system put a semicolon there and
paste in the values but in this case
this is a new way that Windows 10 does it
you just select new and you enter another
values there click on ok and what's
happened now is that Windows 10 has
actually updated our environment variable
so click okay close it down i can click on ok
their alright at that point the path now
been set so what we can do now is check
that the sqlite command line shell is
working the easiest way to do that is
just to come down to here you can either
just type it if it's under Windows 10 type
CMD alternatively you can actually click
on the right click on the windows
startup image down here right click
and select run and the type cmd
either way you get to the command line
prompt block like you can see the screen
there and what we can do now is type...
...just to verify that sqlite 3
is working and you can see that
is actually working actually came
up and started up for us and that's good
and as we can see that the things
are working nicely and keep in mind you
may see a slightly different version
number showing on the screen to what I got here
but that's ok so long as it
actually works
it means it's the sqlite command
line shell is ready to go we can
start using that in future videos
alright so type in....to get out of
sqlite three and type exit to close down
the command prompt window and at this point
your good to go sqlite three is
installed on your Windows machine unless
you've got a mac and a linux machine
also you can actually skip the next two
videos and move on to start where we
actually start using sqlite3 i'll
see you in the next video